---
layout: post
title: "Using Entity Framework with Razor Pages"
author: Zach Bernheimer
---

Back in lab 8, I struggled with figuring out how to link the properties of multiple entities together, so I was excited to learn how to do it properly in this lab. The first few steps of [the tutorial]("https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/aspnet/core/data/ef-rp/intro?view=aspnetcore-7.0&tabs=visual-studio-code") were pretty easy for me, and I was able to get through them just by going through the steps one at a time. I got through part five in november, but then I started working on my final project. While I used it as a reference tool to create bits and pieces of the final project, I ended up not finishing the rest of the tutorial in full until now.

When I came back to this lab to complete the tutorial, I kept running into errors that didn't seem like they should have been there. This was the most frustrating part of this lab. Code that was copied directly from the tutorial was just not working on my maching. Specifically, I had a lot of issues with sections 7 and 8 about updating related data and managing concurrency.

During section 7, I found that there were several models that kept failing statements like

```csharp
if (await TryUpdateModelAsync<Course>(
        emptyCourse,
        "course",   // Prefix for form value.
        s => s.CourseID, s => s.DepartmentID, s => s.Title, s => s.Credits))
{
    _context.Courses.Add(emptyCourse);
    await _context.SaveChangesAsync();
    return RedirectToPage("./Index");
}
```

Even when I looked at the model and all the input fields and models were exactly how they were supposed to be in the tutorial, the TryUpdateModelAsync function would constantly return false, and when I looked at the actual data values of the object that was created by the InputModel, there would be null fields where I had specifically entered values in the textbox. This happened with both Courses and Instructors for the editing and creation pages. While I attempted to fix the missing data in the model, I found it was actually present in the form fields, just not in the linked Course or Instructor. In this case, the missing value was the department field, so I was able to add a line to manually look up the department by ID.

```csharp
if (await TryUpdateModelAsync<Course>(
        emptyCourse,
        "course",   // Prefix for form value.
        s => s.CourseID, s => s.DepartmentID, s => s.Title, s => s.Credits))
{
    emptyCourse.Department = _context.Departments.Find(Course.DepartmentID);
    _context.Courses.Add(emptyCourse);
    await _context.SaveChangesAsync();
    return RedirectToPage("./Index");
}
```
For Intructors, the fix was a lot more involved. I had to mark several fields as optional in the model, and eventually I had to get rid of the TryUpdateModelAsync call altogether, and I ended up with the code below:

```csharp
public async Task<IActionResult> OnPostAsync(string[] selectedCourses)
{
    var newInstructor = new Instructor(){
        // Assign form values to new Instructor object
        LastName = Instructor.LastName,
        FirstMidName = Instructor.FirstMidName,
        OfficeAssignment = Instructor.OfficeAssignment,
        HireDate = Instructor.HireDate
    };
    if (newInstructor.OfficeAssignment.Instructor == null){
        newInstructor.OfficeAssignment.Instructor = newInstructor;
    }

    //
    // Tutorial code for selecting courses (removed for brevity)
    //

    try
    {
        _context.Instructors.Add(newInstructor);
        await _context.SaveChangesAsync();
        return RedirectToPage("./Index");
    }
    catch (Exception ex)
    {
        _logger.LogError(ex.Message);
    }

    PopulateAssignedCourseData(_context, newInstructor);
    return Page();
}
```

Since this gets rid of one of the model validation steps, it's not ideal, and I wish I had been able to figure out a way around this.

If I had finished this tutorial earlier, I think it might have been more helpfult to me on the final project, but I've actually had fewer issues working with multiple entities on the final project than I have in this lab. There are certainly other challenges, but these particular issues didn't arise. Even so, the part of this tutorial I finished in November – especially the sorting and filtering, and the technique of loading connected objects with .Include statements – definitely helped me be prepared to take on the challenges of the final project.

The code for this project can be found at <https://github.com/zachbernheimer/csci340lab9>.