---
layout: post
title: "SW Reflection"
author: Zach Bernheimer
---

Throughout this project, I found that building an understanding of our community partner's needs and listening openly to their feedback was one of the most important skills I used. This communication is what ultimately allowed us to put together a website that meets the needs of our partner. Of course, programming skills were also important. I had to rely on my troubleshooting ability and persistance to research and solve problems in the code. Since so much of the tools we worked with in this class were new to me, such as the ASP.NET framework and the C# language, I had to do a lot of independent learning to figure out how to implement specific features, and being able to go through that process, while sharing knowledge with my teammates, really helped us get the project completed. It was especially helpful that as a team we were able to devide a lot of this work and learning and then come back together to help each other understand the whole of the project. One particular instance where my pre-existing knowledge was helpful was when we needed to create a way to import a lot of textbook data into our project at one time instead of manually entering it. It was very exciting to be able to use concepts and skills I learned in previous classes, particularly about parsing text, and apply them to improve the utility of this project for our community partner.

Our community partner, Hendrix Student Outreach Services, works to provide resources and support to the entire hendrix community. This includes physical goods such as textbooks, household goods, toiletries, and food, and also other kinds of support like mentoring and assistance with legal procedings. This is critical work that benefits everyone in our community, but a lot of people don't know these resources are available and the process to access them is not very easy. I think this approach of providing direct support and assistance to the community with no strings or limitations attached is critical because it gives community members more options and support in times of need. Our work on this project was the first step in making a website that will make these resources more accessible to the community and give people a clearer picture of what resources are available, as well as making these resources easier to manage for our partner. Before working on this project, I didn't know most of what SOS actually does to support the community, and I learned a lot from our conversations with Ms. Coker about how SOS has impacted Hendrix in a positive way. I especially like the free textbook re-use program, because textbooks are a major financial burden on students, often costing hundreds of dollars per semester, and are sometimes only used once. I think this is one area where the website we built has the potential to make the most change, because it will make a live list of available textbooks accessible to students, and make the management of the system much easier for Ms. Coker.

One thing we talked about in this class that changed my perspective on the world was data anonymization. I didn't fully understand how difficult and important it is to make data properly anonymous, and it raised a lot of questions for me about how much data we as a society should actually be making publicly available on the internet, especially because poorly handled data can easily be used to identify and target individuals vulnerable situations. In our specific project, this turned out to be less of a concern because we don't have any public facing data, but it's something our partner might want to implement in the future as a way to show how the program helps the community in the form of charts, tables, and reports. We also store a lot of detailed personal information including names, addresses, emergency contacts, phone numbers, emails, and more. Our community partner also sometimes handles sensitive medical records, which cannot be stored or transferred through our site because our website is not HIPPA compliant. In our first client meeting we discussed this data, which Ms. Coker currently manages manualy and is stored securely. This entire issue raised some questions for me, mainly, what information should we be collecting and how should we be storing it? We built this website on the assumption that it is secure, but I also know that no security is infallible. Data breaches are frequent occurences. Maybe the best security for us is that as a small organization, SOS is less likely to be targeted, but I still wonder if there are better ways to store this information that don't allow it to be exposed. We also had to balance a user's right to delete their personal information from the website, which was included with the Identity part of the .NET framework, with our client's need to have this information stored so that it can be shared with the government as stipulated in the grant funding.

This project helped me realize that service to the community doesn't need to start with massive changes to laws or global movements. Some of the most pressing issues – food insecurity, educational equity, access to basic supplies – can be addressed on a local and community level. While I don't think this has fully changed my views on what issues are important to me, it has changed my understanding of how I can contribute to the community and how impactful programs like SOS are. Change requires action on every level in order to be effective, and immediate support of those in need should be the highest priority. Yes, food and housing insecurity, health and education equity, racism, sexism, and climate change are societal problems, and require change on the scale of governemnts, yet this cannot be a reason to ignore what we as individuals and communities can do to enact change. Standing idly by because these challenges are so much bigger than ourselves is simply not an option.

